Most existing works on fairness assume the model has full access to demographic information. However, there exist scenarios where demographic information is partially available because a record was not maintained throughout data collection or for privacy reasons. This setting is known asdemographic scarce regime. Prior research has shown that training an attribute classifier to replace the missing sensitive attributes (proxy) can still improve fairness. However, using proxy-sensitive attributes worsens fairness-accuracy tradeoffs compared to true sensitive attributes. To address this limitation, we propose a framework to build attribute classifiers that achieve better fairness-accuracy tradeoffs. Our method introduces uncertainty awareness in the attribute classifier and enforces fairness on samples with demographic information inferred with the lowest uncertainty. We show empirically that enforcing fairness constraints on samples with uncertain sensitive attributes can negatively impact the fairness-accuracy tradeoff. Our experiments on five datasets showed that the proposed framework yields models with significantly better fairness-accuracy tradeoffs than classic attribute classifiers. Surprisingly, our framework can outperform models trained with fairness constraints on the true sensitive attributes in most benchmarks. We also show that these findings are consistent with other uncertainty measures such as conformal prediction. The source code is available athttps://github.com/patrikken/fair-dsr.

Mitigating machine learning bias against certain demographic groups becomes challenging when demographic information is wholly or partially missing. Demographic information can be missing for various reasons, e.g., due to legal restrictions, prohibiting the collection of sensitive information of individuals, or voluntary disclosure of such information. As people are more concerned about privacy, reluctant users will not provide sensitive information. As such, demographic information is available only for a few users. Ademographic scarceregime was the term used byAwasthi et al. (2021)to describe this particular setting. The data in this setting can be divided into two sets:𝒟1subscript𝒟1\mathcal{D}_{1}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPTand𝒟2subscript𝒟2\mathcal{D}_{2}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT. The dataset𝒟1subscript𝒟1\mathcal{D}_{1}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPTdoes not contain demographic information, while𝒟2subscript𝒟2\mathcal{D}_{2}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPTcontains both sensitive and non-sensitive information. The goal is to train a fair classifier with respect to different (unobserved) demographic groups in𝒟1subscript𝒟1\mathcal{D}_{1}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT. Without demographic information in𝒟1subscript𝒟1\mathcal{D}_{1}caligraphic_D start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT, it is more challenging to enforce group fairness notions such asstatistical parity(Dwork et al.,2012)andequalized odds(Hardt et al.,2016). Algorithms to enforce these notions require access to sensitive attributes to quantify and mitigate the model’s disparities across different groups(Hardt et al.,2016; Agarwal et al.,2018). However, having access to another dataset where sensitive attributes are available gives room to train a sensitive attribute classifier that can serve as aproxyfor the missing ones. We are interested in understanding what level of fairness/accuracy one can achieve if proxy-sensitive attributes are used to replace the true sensitive attributes and properties of the sensitive attribute classifier and the data distribution that influences the fairness-accuracy tradeoff.

In their study,Awasthi et al. (2021)demonstrated a counter-intuitive finding: when using proxy-sensitive attributes, neither the highest accuracy nor an equal error rate of the sensitive attribute classifier has an impact on the accuracy of the bias estimation. AlthoughGupta et al. (2018)showed that improving fairness for theproxydemographic group can improve fairness with respect to the true demographic group; it remains unclear how existing fairness mechanisms would perform in the presence of proxy-sensitive attributes and how the fairness-accuracy tradeoff is impacted. We show that existing fairness-enhancing methods(Hardt et al.,2016; Agarwal et al.,2018)can be robust to noise introduced in the sensitive attribute space by the proxy attribute classifier, i.e., unfairness can be mitigated when proxy attributes are used instead of the sensitive attribute. However, the fairness-accuracy tradeoff worsens when fairness constraints are imposed on these proxy-sensitive attributes. We aim to provide insights into the distribution of sensitive attributes that can yield better fairness and accuracy performances. We hypothesize that the uncertainty of the sensitive attribute classifier plays a critical role in improving fairness-accuracy tradeoffs on downstream tasks. Specifically, we argue that samples withreliabledemographic information should be used to fit fairness constraints, backed up by the intuition that these samples areeasierto discriminate against, while samples with uncertain demographic information are already hard to discriminate against. Validating this hypothesis requires effective uncertainty estimation in the sensitive attribute space.

In this paper, we propose a framework to handleFairness underDemographicScarceRegime (FairDSR). FairDSR consists of two phases. In the first phase, we construct an uncertainty-aware Deep Neural Network (DNN) model to predict demographic information. The training is semi-supervised using self-ensembling(Tarvainen & Valpola,2017), and the uncertainty of the predictions is measured and improved during the training using Monte Carlo dropout(Gal & Ghahramani,2016). The first phase outputs for each data point, the predicted sensitive attribute, and the uncertainty of the prediction. In the second phase, the classifier for the target task is trained with fairness constraints w.r.t to the predicted sensitive attributes. However, fairness constraints are imposed only on samples whose sensitive attribute values are predicted with low uncertainty. 
Our results rely heavily on dropout regularization and the effectiveness of the uncertainty measure. Existing uncertainty measures compute prediction uncertainty using the model in a certain epoch, e.g., in the last training epoch. However, the uncertainty measure can vary for different models in different training epochs due to different perturbations, such as network dropout, input noise, and data ordering. Hence, we adopt self-ensembling to compute more consistent uncertainty by considering the training dynamic. In self-ensembling learning, the model ensemble is obtained using an exponential running average of model snapshots. In the semi-supervised setup, an unsupervised loss term ensures the model’s output remains consistent with different perturbations. For example, given a set of labeled or unlabeled samples, the unsupervised loss enforces the model’s output at the current epoch to be similar to the output aggregated from previous training epochs under different perturbations. The aggregated outputs can be obtained using the moving average of the model’s outputLaine & Aila (2017)or the model’s weightsTarvainen & Valpola (2017)throughout the training. In the first phase of FairDSR, we use a similar approach to train the attribute classifier with a reliable uncertainty measure in the data without demographic information. In addition to supervised loss, we add an unsupervised loss term that ensures the model’s uncertainty remains consistent within epochs.

On the other hand, considering the other aspect of our hypothesis, the uncertainty estimated by our method is used to derive a subset of the dataset having higher uncertainty in the demographic information prediction. We demonstrate that using this subset to train a model without fairness constraints can yield fairer outcomes. Furthermore, we show how other uncertainty measures such as conformal prediction(Angelopoulos et al.,2023)can be integrated with our framework while achieving similar performance gains regarding tradeoffs in fairness and accuracy.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

We show that the fairness-accuracy tradeoff is suboptimal when using proxy-sensitive attributes instead of true-sensitive attributes.
Specifically, when the sensitive attribute is partially available, replacing missing values using data imputation techniques based on k-nearest neighbor (KNN) or DNN models can yield a reasonably fair model but a worse fairness-accuracy tradeoff.

We propose a simple yet effective framework to improve the tradeoff by exploiting the uncertainty of the sensitive attribute predictions, which we show can play an important role in achieving better accuracy-fairness tradeoffs. We hypothesize that a better fairness-accuracy tradeoff can be achieved when fairness constraints are imposed on samples whose sensitive attribute values can be predicted with low uncertainty. We also show that a model trained without fairness constraints but using data with higher uncertainty in the predictions of sensitive attributes tends to be fairer across different fairness metrics.

We perform extensive experiments on a wide range of real-world datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework compared to existing methods. Our results also show that the FairDSR can significantly outperform a model trained with fairness constraints on observed sensitive attributes. Applying our method in settings where demographic information is fully available can yield better fairness-accuracy tradeoffs.