Last Updated: February 19, 2026

This article was co-authored byThuong Tan. Thuong Tan is a Noodle Expert and the Founder of Noodelist, a food startup producing plant-based instant noodles. Thuong holds a Bachelor’s degree in International Business and Marketing from Haaga-Helia, University of Applied Sciences, and an MBA in Luxury Brand Management from IFA Paris, Polimoda/Shanghai University. Noodelist’s mission is to produce premium plant-based moroheiya noodles that are nutrient-dense, texturally pleasing, and environmentally friendly.This article has been viewed 359,116 times.

Ramen is an easy, quick-cooking meal perfect for those on the go or college students who are busy studying. While it is affordable, it is not very nutritious, and some people may find it tasteless, while others find the noodles too mushy. Fortunately, there are several tricks you can do to ensure that the noodles come out perfect. You can also add lots of other flavors and toppings, besides the flavoring packet that's included. With a little bit of creativity, you can have a tastier and more nutritious meal in no time!

Be openminded in the kitchen."I'm a firm believer that the world should be your oyster when you're cooking. People should open themselves to other cuisines – there are a lot of hidden secrets all over the world."





In this video, we’ll show you how to cook delicious ramen noodles using Noodelist plant-based instant noodles. First, place the noodles and soup base in a bowl. Add 1 ½ cups (350 mL) of boiling water and cover for 5 minutes. Once the noodles are done, stir and serve them as is, or add fresh vegetables like scallions, bean sprouts, watercress, or spinach. You can also add a hard-boiled egg or thinly sliced cooked meat, like pork tenderloin or flank steak. To give your ramen even more flavor, you can add things like lime juice, sesame oil, chili flakes, or coriander.For tips on what sauces and spices to add to your ramen for extra flavor, read on!Did this summary help you?YesNo

Follow Us