You can now request help from theHelppage in your Play Console account.  If you don't have access to Play Console, ask your account admin for an invite.

In November 2023, we changed the requirements for publishing new apps on Google Play, to help developers to test their app, identify issues, get feedback, and ensure that everything is ready before they launch. These changes require developers with personal accounts created after November 13, 2023, to meet specific testing requirements before they can make their app available on Google Play.

This article provides an overview of the new requirements, a summary of the different testing tracks in Play Console, and the steps that developers with personal accounts will need to take to make their apps available to users on Google Play.

Testing is an integral part of the app development process. By running tests against your app consistently, you can verify your app's correctness, functional behavior, and usability before you release it publicly. This minimizes the impact of any technical or user experience issues, and helps you to release the best version of your app. Developers that regularly use Play Console's testing tools prior to publishing their apps are able to provide higher quality experiences that can lead to higher ratings and more success on Google Play.

To help all developers to deliver high-quality apps, we're introducing new testing requirements. Developers with personal accounts created after November 13, 2023, will need to test their apps before those apps are eligible to be published for distribution on Google Play. Certain features in Play Console, such asProduction(Test and release>Production) andPre-registration(Test and release>Testing>Pre-registration), will be disabled until developers meet these requirements.

If you have a newly created personal developer account, you must run a closed test for your app with a minimum of 12 testers who have been opted-in for at least the last 14 days continuously. When you meet these criteria, you can apply for production access on theDashboardin Play Console so that you can ultimately distribute your app on Google Play. When you apply, you must answer some questions to help us understand your app, its testing process, and its production readiness.

You can read about the different types of testing tracks and requirements for each in more detail below, and find more details about applying for production access.

Play Console provides different types of testing tracks so that you can gradually ramp up testing and improve your app to the point that it's ready to reach billions of users on Google Play.